About Me

I am an economist who studies science, technology, and public policy. My
current work focuses on three areas: the economics and political economy
of the NIH; pharmaceutical patent policy; and the uses of academic
research by firms and policymakers. Across these areas, I’m interested
in how the history of science and technology policy shapes and informs
current policy debates.

I am a Professor and founding faculty member of the School of Government
and Policy (SGP) at Johns Hopkins University, with a joint appointment
at the Carey Business School. I am also a Research Associate in the
Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Program at the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). I was a founding member of NBER's
Innovation Information Initiative (I3), co-lead the NBER Valuing Medical
Innovation Network, and serve on the Board of Reviewing Editors at
Science. Below you'll find my CV, a longer bio, links to recent papers,
and contact information.

Current CV (PDF) | Longer Bio

Recent Papers

Indirect Cost Recovery in U.S. Innovation Policy: History, Evidence, and Avenues for Reform

(with Pierre Azoulay and Daniel P. Gross)
NBER Entrepreneurship and Innovation Policy and the Economy
(forthcoming)
- Paper

The U.S. government has funded university research for nearly 80 years,
with a significant share of this funding supporting the fixed costs of
science through indirect cost recovery (ICR). We explain the history,
objectives, and mechanics of ICR policy and review key controversies. We
also provide new empirical evidence on indirect costs at the NIH, a
major target of past and present ICR reform. Using data from over 350
institutions, we find that while negotiated ICR rates average 58%,
effective rates—what NIH actually pays—average 42%, with relatively
little variation across institutions or over time. Our analyses also
suggest that a proposed 15% at rate would significantly cut NIH funding
for many grantees, disproportionately affecting institutions most linked
to commercial patenting and drug development. We conclude by assessing
the current system, and major reform proposals, across several ICR
policy objectives: support for research and infrastructure,
cost-efficiency incentives, implementation costs, and transparency. No
single approach dominates on all dimensions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Therapeutic Consequences of the War: World War II and the 20th-Century Expansion of Biomedicine

(with Daniel P. Gross)
NBER Working Paper w33457
- Paper

During World War II, the U.S. Committee on Medical Research (CMR)
undertook an integrated, cross-sectoral effort to develop medical
science and technology for war, representing the U.S. government's first
substantial investment in medical research. Using data on all CMR
research contracts, we show that although it had mixed results during
the war, it laid a foundation for the postwar takeoff of the U.S.
biomedical innovation system. New and emerging research areas it
supported experienced rapid growth in postwar science. It also fueled
new postwar drug development, influenced medical practice, and shaped
extramural research funding at the National Institutes of Health.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Patents, Innovation, and Competition in Pharmaceuticals: The Hatch-Waxman Act after 40 Years

(with C. Scott Hemphill)
Journal of Economic Perspectives Spring 2025
- Paper

-   Supplemental Appendix
-   Replication Package

A central policy issue in pharmaceuticals is how to balance the dynamic
benefits of new drugs against the static benefits of low prices for
existing drugs. In the United States, that balance is set by the
Hatch-Waxman Act. We review the Act's origins and key features, then
present evidence on its effects on competition and innovation. On the
competition side, we show how the Act creates incentives for brands to
accumulate patents and generics to challenge them, with the result being
a rough stalemate. We also discuss strategies deployed by brands to
delay generic entry. On the innovation side, we show that the Act's
patent extension provisions—which aim to allow branded firms to make up
for time lost during clinical trials and regulatory review—are
incomplete, resulting in potential distortions. The net result is a
convoluted and expensive approach to balancing innovation and
competition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using Bayh-Dole Act March-In Rights to Lower US Drug Prices

(with Lisa Larrimore Ouellette)
JAMA Health Forum, November 2024
- Paper

-   Dataset: Orange Book Patent Data, Including Public-Sector Patent
    Information, 1985-2023

In December 2023, the Biden-Harris Administration released a proposed
framework for exercising government march-in rights (effectively
granting compulsory licenses for those patents to generic drug makers)
under the Bayh-Dole Act on patents on taxpayer-funded drugs, which has
renewed questions about whether march-in rights could promote cost
savings through generic competition or harm pharmaceutical innovation.
While both proponents and critics of the new rules view them as having
broad scope, march-in rights can be exercised only on patents that
result from federally funded research, and they can enable generic entry
only if all patents on a drug were public-sector patents. In this paper,
we examine the feasibility of using march-in rights to lower
pharmaceutical prices by examining patents on drugs approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) from 1985 to 2022. Of 883 new
molecular entities approved from 1985 to 2022, 68 (8%) had a Bayh-Dole
patent, but only 18 (2%) had solely Bayh-Dole patents. Although
Bayh-Dole march-in rights could remove patent barriers to generic entry
for a few drugs, their overall effect would be limited.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The History and Political Economy of NIH Peer Review

Brookings, Institute for Progress, Good Science Project Building a
Better NIH Series

-   Paper

A major focus of recent NIH reform efforts has been on the agency’s peer
review system, the machinery it uses to allocate the bulk of its
funding. This paper provides historical context for these reform efforts
by chronicling the origins, and evolution, and political economy of the
NIH peer review process, and the complexities of NIH reform.

Contact

Email: sampat@jhu.edu
Bluesky: @sampat.bsky.social
